feat(auth): promote framework-agnostic server toolkit to public beta subpath (`@neondatabase/auth/server`) (#161)
neondatabase/neon-js: packages/auth/BUILDING-AN-ADAPTER.md

├── adapter.ts         RequestContext: framework -> toolkit bridge
├── handler.ts         /api/auth/* route mount (calls handleAuthProxyRequest)
├── middleware.ts      route protection (calls processAuthMiddleware)
└── index.ts           createYourAdapter: wires the above 3 + createAuthServer
```

All four files import only from `@neondatabase/auth/server` and your
framework's request/response APIs.

## Step 1 — Implement `RequestContext`

`RequestContext` is the contract between the toolkit and your framework. It
abstracts away how your framework exposes the in-flight request's cookies,
headers, and origin. Implementations are framework-specific but always
shaped the same way:

```typescript
// adapter.ts
import type { RequestContext } from '@neondatabase/auth/server';
import { extractNeonAuthCookies } from '@neondatabase/auth/server';
import { getContext } from 'hono/context-storage'; // example: Hono

function createHonoRequestContext(): RequestContext {
  const c = getContext();
  return {
    getCookies: () => extractNeonAuthCookies(c.req.header('cookie') ?? ''),
    setCookie: (name, value, options) => {
      // Map toolkit options into your framework's cookie API

>       c.header('Set-Cookie', serializeCookie(name, value, options), {

Author: `serializeCookie` isn't exported from `@neondatabase/auth/server` — the helper you want is `serializeSetCookie`, which takes a single object rather than positional `(name, value, options)` args:

```typescript
import { serializeSetCookie } from '@neondatabase/auth/server';

setCookie: (name, value, options) => {
  c.header('Set-Cookie', serializeSetCookie({ name, value, ...options }), { append: true });
},
```

Author: Fixed in fa7841bf1605e0eb38e99006c9134e712453c449. Step 1 cookie example now uses `serializeSetCookie({ name, value, ...options })` (the actual exported helper, takes one `ParsedCookie` object).

    baseUrl: config.baseUrl,
    context: createHonoRequestContext,
    cookieSecret: config.cookies.secret,
    sessionDataTtl: config.cookies.sessionDataTtl,
    domain: config.cookies.domain,
    sameSite: config.cookies.sameSite,
    log,
  });

  // Attach the route handler + middleware so apps get one cohesive surface.
  Object.assign(server, {
    handler: () => authHandler({ baseUrl: config.baseUrl, log, ...config.cookies }),
    middleware: (opts: { loginUrl: string }) =>
      authMiddleware({ baseUrl: config.baseUrl, log, ...config.cookies, ...opts }),
  });

  return server as typeof server & {
    handler: typeof authHandler;
    middleware: typeof authMiddleware;
  };
}
```

## Step 3 — Mount the proxy handler

The toolkit's `handleAuthProxyRequest` is a pure function from
`(Request, paths, config) -> Promise<Response>`. Mount it under the conventional
`/api/auth/*` path, extracting `paths` from your framework's router:

```typescript
// handler.ts
import { handleAuthProxyRequest } from '@neondatabase/auth/server';

export function authHandler(config: ProxyConfig) {
  return async (c: Context) => {
    const path = c.req.path.split('/api/auth/')[1]?.split('/') ?? [];

>     return handleAuthProxyRequest(c.req.raw, path, config);

Author: Two issues here:

1. `handleAuthProxyRequest` takes a single `AuthProxyConfig` object, not positional arguments — `(c.req.raw, path, config)` won't compile. The description on line 120 (`"pure function from (Request, paths, config)"`) is also wrong.
2. `path` should be a `string` (e.g. `'sign-in/email'`), not `string[]`.

Correct form:
```typescript
const path = c.req.path.replace(/^\/api\/auth\//, '');
return handleAuthProxyRequest({
  request: c.req.raw,
  path,
  baseUrl: config.baseUrl,
  cookieSecret: config.cookieSecret,
  log,
});
```

Ref: `src/server/proxy/handler.ts` line 41 for the full `AuthProxyConfig` shape.

Author: Fixed in fa7841bf1605e0eb38e99006c9134e712453c449. Step 3 example now calls `handleAuthProxyRequest({ request, path, baseUrl, cookieSecret, ... })` with `path` as a slash-joined `string` (`c.req.path.replace(/^\/api\/auth\//, '')`). Prose claim on line 120 corrected too.

  };
}
```

The toolkit handles upstream URL composition, header forwarding, cookie
sanitization, session-data cookie minting, and network error classification
internally. Your handler is intentionally a one-liner.

## Step 4 — Add middleware

`processAuthMiddleware` returns a discriminated `MiddlewareResult` describing
what should happen to the response. Translate each variant into your
framework's native response/redirect API:

```typescript
// middleware.ts
import { processAuthMiddleware, DEFAULT_AUTH_SKIP_ROUTES } from '@neondatabase/auth/server';

export function authMiddleware(config: MiddlewareConfig) {
  return async (c: Context, next: Next) => {
    const url = new URL(c.req.url);
    const result = await processAuthMiddleware({
      request: c.req.raw,
      pathname: url.pathname,
      skipRoutes: DEFAULT_AUTH_SKIP_ROUTES,
      ...config,
    });

>     switch (result.type) {

Author: Several bugs in this switch block that will silently break any adapter built from this example:

- `result.type` → should be `result.action` (the discriminant on `MiddlewareResult`). At runtime `result.type` is always `undefined`, so every case is unreachable.
- `result.cookiesToSet` → `result.cookies` (`string[] | undefined`)
- `case 'redirect'` doesn't exist — the two variants are `'redirect_oauth'` and `'redirect_login'`
- `result.url` → `result.redirectUrl` (`URL`, not `string`)

Critically, `'redirect_oauth'` is missing entirely. Without it, post-OAuth `?code=` callbacks never complete and users silently loop back to login.

Correct pattern (mirrors `src/next/server/middleware.ts`):
```typescript
switch (result.action) {
  case 'allow':
    await next();
    for (const cookie of result.cookies ?? []) c.header('Set-Cookie', cookie, { append: true });
    return;
  case 'redirect_oauth':
    for (const cookie of result.cookies) c.header('Set-Cookie', cookie, { append: true });
    return c.redirect(result.redirectUrl.toString(), 302);
  case 'redirect_login':
    return c.redirect(result.redirectUrl.toString(), 302);
}
```

Author: Fixed in fa7841bf1605e0eb38e99006c9134e712453c449. Step 4 middleware rewritten to mirror `src/next/server/middleware.ts` exactly: discriminant `action`, all three variants (`'allow'`, `'redirect_oauth'`, `'redirect_login'`), correct field names (`cookies` / `redirectUrl`), and `result.headers` forwarding on `'allow'` for the `x-neon-auth-middleware` signal. Added a variants table at the top so the OAuth-callback path is hard to miss.

import { getContext } from 'hono/context-storage'; // example: Hono

function createHonoRequestContext(): RequestContext {
  const c = getContext();
  return {
    getCookies: () => extractNeonAuthCookies(c.req.header('cookie') ?? ''),
    setCookie: (name, value, options) => {
      // `serializeSetCookie` takes a single `ParsedCookie` object — the toolkit's
      // canonical Set-Cookie serializer. Pass the toolkit's `options` through
      // verbatim; it already sanitizes flags before reaching your adapter.
      c.header('Set-Cookie', serializeSetCookie({ name, value, ...options }), {
        append: true,
      });
    },
    getHeader: (name) => c.req.header(name) ?? null,
    getOrigin: () => c.req.header('origin') ?? '',
    getFramework: () => 'hono',
  };
}
```

See the [`RequestContext` JSDoc](./src/server/request-context.ts) for the full
contract — every method's input, output, and "MAY throw / MUST NOT throw"
semantics are documented inline.

## Step 2 — Build the server factory

Compose `createAuthServer` with your `RequestContext` factory and the framework
adapter's own surface (handler + middleware):

```typescript
// index.ts

> import {
>   createAuthServer,
>   validateCookieConfig,
>   resolveNeonAuthLogging,
>   type NeonAuthConfig,
> } from '@neondatabase/auth/server';
> import { authHandler } from './handler';
> import { authMiddleware } from './middleware';
> 
> export function createHonoAuth(config: NeonAuthConfig) {
>   validateCookieConfig(config.cookies);
>   const log = resolveNeonAuthLogging(config);
> 
>   const server = createAuthServer({
>     baseUrl: config.baseUrl,
>     context: createHonoRequestContext,
>     cookieSecret: config.cookies.secret,
>     sessionDataTtl: config.cookies.sessionDataTtl,
>     domain: config.cookies.domain,
>     sameSite: config.cookies.sameSite,
>     log,
>   });
> 
>   // Attach the route handler + middleware so apps get one cohesive surface.
>   Object.assign(server, {
>     handler: () => authHandler({ baseUrl: config.baseUrl, log, ...config.cookies }),
>     middleware: (opts: { loginUrl: string }) =>
>       authMiddleware({ baseUrl: config.baseUrl, log, ...config.cookies, ...opts }),
>   });

Reviewer: **FIX 5 (docs): this getting-started snippet doesn't compile.**

`Object.assign` spreads `...config.cookies`, which yields `{ secret, ... }`, but `authHandler` / `authMiddleware` (Steps 3 & 4) read FLAT fields (`config.cookieSecret`, `config.domain`, `config.sameSite`). So `cookieSecret` ends up `undefined` and the spread shape never matches the `ProxyConfig` the handlers expect. Map `config.cookies` explicitly into one flat `proxyConfig` and reuse it (this also matches the real flat `NeonAuthServerConfig` = `{ baseUrl, cookieSecret, context, sessionDataTtl?, domain?, sameSite?, log? }`):

```suggestion
  // `createAuthServer` takes a FLAT config: the nested `cookies` block from
  // your adapter's public `NeonAuthConfig` is mapped to top-level fields.
  const server = createAuthServer({
    baseUrl: config.baseUrl,
    context: createHonoRequestContext,
    cookieSecret: config.cookies.secret,
    sessionDataTtl: config.cookies.sessionDataTtl,
    domain: config.cookies.domain,
    sameSite: config.cookies.sameSite,
    log,
  });

  // Attach the route handler + middleware so apps get one cohesive surface.
  // `authHandler` / `authMiddleware` (Steps 3 & 4) also read FLAT fields
  // (`cookieSecret`, `domain`, `sameSite`), so map `config.cookies` explicitly
  // rather than spreading it (a spread would yield `secret`, not `cookieSecret`).
  const proxyConfig = {
    baseUrl: config.baseUrl,
    cookieSecret: config.cookies.secret,
    sessionDataTtl: config.cookies.sessionDataTtl,
    domain: config.cookies.domain,
    sameSite: config.cookies.sameSite,
    log,
  };

  Object.assign(server, {
    handler: () => authHandler(proxyConfig),
    middleware: (opts: { loginUrl: string }) =>
      authMiddleware({ ...proxyConfig, ...opts }),
  });
```

      domain: config.domain,
      sameSite: config.sameSite,
      log: config.log,
    });

    switch (result.action) {
      case 'allow':
        // Forward any signal headers (e.g. `x-neon-auth-middleware: true`) so
        // downstream handlers know auth middleware already ran.
        if (result.headers) {
          for (const [k, v] of Object.entries(result.headers)) c.req.raw.headers.set(k, v);
        }
        await next();
        if (result.cookies) {
          for (const cookie of result.cookies) c.header('Set-Cookie', cookie, { append: true });
        }
        return;

      case 'redirect_oauth':
        // Verifier-cleanup cookies MUST be set on the redirect response.
        for (const cookie of result.cookies) c.header('Set-Cookie', cookie, { append: true });
        return c.redirect(result.redirectUrl.toString(), 302);

      case 'redirect_login':
        if (result.cookies) {
          for (const cookie of result.cookies) c.header('Set-Cookie', cookie, { append: true });
        }
        return c.redirect(result.redirectUrl.toString(), 302);
    }
  };
}
```

`DEFAULT_AUTH_SKIP_ROUTES` matches what the Next.js adapter uses; you can

> compose it with your own public routes (`[...DEFAULT_AUTH_SKIP_ROUTES, '/healthz']`).

Reviewer: **FIX 6 (docs/DX): add a "Node-style (non-Fetch) frameworks" section.**

Express and Fastify are listed as targets up top but get no guidance, and they hit several real gotchas I ran into building the adapters. Suggest inserting a new `## Node-style (non-Fetch) frameworks (Express, Fastify)` section here (before "What the toolkit gives you for free") covering, with snippets:

1. **Build a Fetch `Request` from a Node req** - absolute URL from `x-forwarded-proto` + `host`, copy headers, pass raw body, and set `duplex: 'half'` when there's a body (else Node's `Request` throws).
2. **Write the `Response` back, preserving multiple `Set-Cookie`** - CRITICAL: use `response.headers.getSetCookie()` (array), NOT `.get('set-cookie')`, which comma-merges and corrupts any cookie with `Expires=Wed, 01 Jan ...`. Write via `res.setHeader('set-cookie', cookies)` / `reply.raw.setHeader`.
3. **Raw body parsing** - Express: `express.raw({ type: '*/*' })` on the auth route; Fastify: `removeAllContentTypeParsers()` + `addContentTypeParser('*', { parseAs: 'buffer' }, ...)`.
4. **Express 5 wildcard** - needs a NAMED wildcard `app.all('/api/auth/*splat', ...)`; bare `/api/auth/*` throws at registration (path-to-regexp v8).
5. **Bind the request via `AsyncLocalStorage`** - the `context` factory runs lazily with no event access, so non-ambient frameworks must stash the per-request Fetch `Request` in an `AsyncLocalStorage` and have `RequestContext` read it.
6. **ESM-only** - `require()` works on Node `>= 22.12` via interop; otherwise use `await import('@neondatabase/auth/server')`.

I have the full section written with code blocks for each point if useful - happy to drop it in a follow-up or paste it here.
